mrc-2537 Document Generic Chart implementation (#545)
mrc-ide/hint: docs/GenericChart.md

hintr - the url to use is included in the dataset config. However, the chart config could be extended to allow generic 
chart visualisations of the standard input and output datasets in the store. 

This diagram shows the main constituents and data flow involved in showing Generic Chart:
 ![Diagram of Generic Chart](GenericChart.png "Diagram of Generic Chart")

When the app is first loaded, Generic Chart metadata is fetched from the endpoint, and is stored for the duration of the 
front end app. It is stored in `genericChart` state. This metadata consists of a dictionary of chart ids, with 
configuration for each, which instructs the component how to display the chart, including what data sources to use, 
what filters to apply, and a [JSONata](https://jsonata.org/) template describing the plotly configuration to use. See 
[below](#chart-config-jsonata) for further details. 

Generic Chart metadata is currently kept in resource files in the back end of HINT. However we may in future hand over 
this metadata to hintr, and have HINT fetch metadata from hintr as well as data. 

> Wherever the `GenericChart component` appears, it is provided with its chart id in a prop, and pulls out the relevant 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Wherever the `GenericChart` component appears, it is provided with its chart id in a prop, and pulls out the relevant 
```

section from the metadata. The chart metadata defines urls from which to fetch datasets (e.g. the custom input time series 
datasets) - the component invokes an action on the GenericChart state to retrieve this data when required, and it is 
stored in the GenericChart state along with dataset id. 

> Currently, `GenericChart` component is only located in the `SurveyAndProgram component`, on the 'Time series' tab.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently, `GenericChart` component is only located in the `SurveyAndProgram` component, on the 'Time series' tab.
```

	// Number of subplots to display per row
        "columns": 3,

	// The column in the data for which a subplot will be shown for each distinct value. 
        "distinctColumn": "area_name",

	// Height in pixels which should be allowed for each row of subplts.
        "heightPerRow": 140
      },
      // This is an array as a future implementation may allow multiple chart types per chart e.g. scatter and bar. 
      // Only one chart config per chart is currently supported		
      "chartConfig": [
        {
          "id": "scatter",

	  // When implemented, this is the translation key for the label to be displayed for this chart type's option 	
          "label": "Scatter",
		
          "config": "...The JSONata config string goes here - see below for more details on this..."
        }
      ]
    }

```

### Chart Config Jsonata

Chart configuration is defined using [JSONata](https://jsonata.org/), a generic json transformation language - at runtime, the `Plotly`
component invokes the transformation on the filtered chart data given the chart configuration JSONata to provide the 
full Plotly chart configuration.

The full Jsonata for the Input Time Series can be found 

> [here](https://github.com/mrc-ide/hint/blob/mrc-2537/src/app/src/main/resources/metadata/input-time-series-config-jsonata.txt),

Author: To be updated to master branch when this is merged

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[here](https://github.com/mrc-ide/hint/blob/mrc-2537/src/app/src/main/resources/metadata/input-time-series-config-jsonata.txt).
```

string [concatenation](https://docs.jsonata.org/other-operators#-concatenation) in jsonata, and `($i+1)` ensures that 
axis indexes start from 1.

```
"y": $map(data[area_name=$v].value, function($thv, $thi) {
   (($thi > 0) and $thv > (1.25 * ($areaData.value)[$thi-1]))
   or
   (($thi < $count($areaData.value)-1) and (($areaData.value)[$thi+1] > (1.25 * $thv)))
   or
   (($thi > 0) and $thv < (0.75 * ($areaData.value)[$thi-1]))
   or
   (($thi < $count($areaData.value)-1) and ($areaData.value)[$thi+1] < (0.75 * $thv))
   ? $thv : null
})
```
This code selects how to draw the highlight trace, by mapping each value for the area to either that value (to include 
it in the trace) or null (to exclude it) based on whether it is at the end or the start of a greater than 25% increase 
(the first two clauses), or at the end of the start (the second two clauses) of a greater than 25% decrease.
This uses JSONata's [ternary operator](https://docs.jsonata.org/other-operators#--conditional) and the `and` and `or` 
[boolean operators](https://docs.jsonata.org/boolean-operators).

```

> `"annotations": $map($areaNames, function($v, $i) {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
"annotations": $map($areaNames, function($v, $i) {
```

  {
  "text": $v & " (" & (data[area_name=$v].area_id)[0] & ")",
  "textfont": {},
  "showarrow": false,
  "x": 0.5,
  "xanchor": "middle",
  "xref": "x" & ($i+1) & " domain",
  "y": 1.1,
  "yanchor": "middle",
  "yref": "y" & ($i+1) & " domain"
  }
})[]
```

We use annotations to add titles to the subplots, as this is the only means Plotly supports. This uses the area names 
and corresponding area ids to make the text of the title, uses the 'x1', 'y1' etc axis identifiers to specify the domain 
in which to place the annotation (`xref` and `yref`) and uses the `x`, `y`, `xanchor` and `yanchor` values to place the 
annotations within the domains.

```

> layout": $merge(..)[]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
"layout": $merge(..)[]
```

In order to provide its child components with the data and metadata they need, GenericChart computes the following properties:

#### chartMetadata

This selects the chartMetadata config object (described [above](#generic-chart-metadata)) for the `chartId` prop out of 
the store's metadata response.

#### chartConfigValues

This assembles configuration values and selections into a form in which child components can use them as props. These are:
- **dataSourceConfigValues**: Information about data sources' metadata and current selections, and about their associated filters. 
- **layoutData**: Special data which `Plotly` will include with the chart data to instruct plotly on how to layout the chart. This
includes subplots configuration. 
- **scrollHeight**: The height of the scrollable area which `Plotly` should give to the chart area, calculated from the number
of rows and configured height per row. 
- **chartConfig**: string containing the JSONata config for the chart, provided to `Plotly`

#### chartData

The chart data to be provided to `Plotly`, found by taking the selected dataset(s) and applying filter selections to them.

### Front end data types

> The following  data types are used to support generic chart configuration:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following data types are used to support generic chart configuration:
```

# Generic Chart

[Introduction](#introduction)\
[Generic Chart metadata](#generic-chart-metadata)\
[Chart Config Jsonata](#chart-config-jsonata)\
[GenericChart component logic](#genericchart-component-logic)\
[Generic Chart Table](#generic-chart-table)

> ## Introducution

Author: :facepalm:

> HINT has a `GenericChart` vue component in the front end. This is currently only used to display Input Time Series charts - 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
HINT has a [`GenericChart`](https://github.com/mrc-ide/hint/tree/master/src/app/static/src/app/components/genericChart) Vue component. This is currently only used to display Input Time Series charts - 
```

however it has been designed to generically accept configuration, chart metadata, and chart data and to display the 
resultant chart using the [Plotly](https://plotly.com/javascript/) library. 

`GenericChart` is intended to be rather self-contained, for example, including its own filter and data source components. 
However it does make use of the store to handle chart data and metadata. This is to avoid the chart needing to re-fetch 
data when it is reloaded.  

> Input Time Series, the sole current implementation for Generic Chart, has custom datasets which must be fetched from 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Input Time Series](https://github.com/mrc-ide/hint/blob/master/src/app/src/main/resources/metadata/generic-chart.json#L2), the sole current instance of Generic Chart, has custom datasets which must be fetched from 
```

hintr - the url to use is included in the dataset config. However, the chart config could be extended to allow generic 
chart visualisations of the standard input and output datasets in the store.

There is a distinction between *data source* and *dataset* in Generic Chart configuration. A *dataset* refers to some data, 
with the associated url from which to fetch it and an id by which to refer to it. A *data source* configures how data
will fill a role in a particular Generic Chart configuration. For example, a chart might configure two data sources, which 
will provide values to the X and Y axes separately. In the Input Time Series, we have only one data source, 'Data source'.

> A data source is fulfilled by a dataset, and configuration defines which datasets should be available for which data sources. In 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A data source is fulfilled by a dataset and the chart configuration defines which datasets should be available for which data sources. In 
```

Input Time Series, both the ANC and ART datasets are available for 'Data source', and the user selects which to use 
from the data source control. 

This diagram shows the main constituents and data flow involved in showing Generic Chart:

> ![Diagram of Generic Chart](GenericChart.png "Diagram of Generic Chart")

Reviewer: If you ever need to update this diagram could you try to hide the spellcheck underlining? It's a bit distracting. Would also help to share the source document and/or post a link to it here for future reference.

Currently, we use filter options defined in the dataset response itself, as for other datasets in HINT. We could 
potentially customise filters for other applications of GenericChart e.g. some filter options might not be available 
for some charts. 
- `Plotly`: an implementation which combines provided chart data and metadata as a JSONata template to a full plotly 
configuration and loads it using the Plotly library. This is very similar to the Chart component in comet. Minor changes 
from that implementation are that we are using the `newPlot` method instead of `react` to accommodate updates to chart 
height when the number of subplots change due to filter changes (particularly are level), and we are using a more 
lightweight Plotly distribution, plotly-js.basic-dist.

This is how they look when rendered in HINT to display the Input Time Series chart:
![Generic Chart Components](GenericChartComponents.png "Generic Chart Components")

### Generic Chart Metadata

The Generic Chart Metadata consists of a dictionary of `GenericChartMetadata` objects, whose keys are the chart ids. 

> Here is an annotated example of GenericChartMetadata:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here is an annotated example of GenericChartMetadata for a single chart:
```

	      // "data" is the only currently supported option i.e. get the filters from the metadata property dataset itself	
          "filters": [ 
            {
              "id": "plot_type",
              "source": "data"
            },
            {
              "id": "area_level",
              "source": "data"
            },
            {
              "id": "time_step",
              "source": "data"
            }
          ]
        },
        {
          "id": "anc",
          "label": "ANC",
          "url": "/chart-data/input-time-series/anc",
          "filters": [
            {
              "id": "plot_type",
              "source": "data"
            },
            {
              "id": "area_level",
              "source": "data"
            },
            {
              "id": "age",
              "source": "data"
            }
          ]
        }
      ],
      "dataSelectors": {
	// Data source is currently the only type of data selector supported.
	// A data source has a particular role in the chart. The user selects which dataset to use for each data source. 
        "dataSources": [
          {
            // Id for this data source

>             "id": "data",

Reviewer: What is the purpose of this ID?

Also, I think it's not ideal to use `data` as an example of an ID because a) it's a data source, not data itself, right? and b) when I see `"source": "data"` above, and a data source with an ID of `"data"` here I automatically link the two in my head, whereas they're not related, are they?

Reviewer: > The id is just for distinguishing data sources from each other.

And how/where is it used? (Sorry!)

Author: It is used in the component to keep track of the selections for each data source (its selected dataset, and selected filter options). It's also used to structure the data passed to plotly, and hence is referenced in the plotly jsonata. So when the jsonata uses e.g. `data.area_name` that 'data' is derived from this id. 
(So actually I maybe won't change this id as that would impact the jsonata, but I'll try to explain it better in the comment.)

Reviewer: Ok, cool. I guessed it might be used in front-end, but not in jsonata, so that's definitely worth commenting on IMO. Thanks!
